Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
drug nomenclature and formulation. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to drug nomenclature and formulation.
Why does nomenclature matter, and what kinds of name does a drug have?
Nomenclature matters for safety and clarity:
a single drug may be known by several names, and confusion between them,
or between similar-sounding names, is a recognised cause of medication error.
A drug typically has three kinds of name.
The chemical name describes its molecular structure precisely but is unwieldy for
everyday use. The generic, or non-proprietary,
name is the official approved name of the active substance,
unique and used internationally.
The proprietary, or brand, name is the manufacturer's trademarked name for its
particular product, of which there may be several for the same active drug.
Prescribing by the generic name is preferred because it identifies the active
substance unambiguously, is not tied to one manufacturer,
and avoids the proliferation and cost of brands.
Explain the international naming conventions and the issue of dual nomenclature.
Generic names are coordinated internationally through the International
Non-proprietary Name system, to give each substance a single,
globally recognised name.
Historically some countries used their own approved names — the British Approved
Names — which occasionally differed,
and these were largely harmonised to the recommended international names,
though a few well-known dual names persist.
The anaesthetist must know both members of these pairs,
because practice and literature are international: adrenaline and epinephrine,
lidocaine and lignocaine, paracetamol and acetaminophen,
and suxamethonium and succinylcholine all refer to the same drugs.
Recognising both names of each pair prevents error and allows reading of the
worldwide literature, which is why a country-neutral approach teaches the synonyms
explicitly.
What is the rationale for generic prescribing, and are there exceptions?
Generic prescribing identifies the active substance unambiguously,
allows any equivalent product to be dispensed, reduces cost,
and avoids confusion between multiple brands of the same drug.
It is therefore the default.
There are, however, recognised exceptions where the brand should be specified:
drugs with a narrow therapeutic index or particular formulation-dependent
behaviour, where switching between products could alter the effect — certain
anticonvulsants, modified-release preparations,
and some biological agents — are best prescribed by brand to ensure the patient
receives a consistent product.
So the principle is generic prescribing,
with deliberate exceptions where the formulation or therapeutic index makes brand
consistency important.
How are drugs classified, and why have more than one system?
Drugs can be classified in several complementary ways,
because no single scheme serves all purposes.
They may be grouped by chemical structure,
which groups together drugs with shared properties — the steroids,
the barbiturates; by mechanism of action or molecular target — the beta-blockers,
the calcium-channel blockers; by physiological system or therapeutic use —
antihypertensives, antiemetics; or by formal systems such as the Anatomical
Therapeutic Chemical classification used for statistics and prescribing.
Each is useful in its context: structural classification predicts shared chemistry
and cross-reactivity, mechanistic classification predicts effects and interactions,
and therapeutic classification aids selection.
Recognising that a drug can be placed in several of these schemes at once is part
of understanding it fully.
What is a formulation, and why is it necessary?
A formulation is the final, usable preparation of a drug — the active substance
together with the excipients and the physical form in which it is presented and
administered.
It is necessary because the pure active substance is rarely suitable for
administration as it is: it may be insoluble, unstable, irritant, badly absorbed,
unpalatable, or impossible to dose accurately.
The formulation overcomes these problems — making the drug soluble and stable,
presenting it for the intended route, controlling the rate and site of release,
and allowing accurate, safe dosing.
So formulation is the pharmaceutical engineering that converts an active molecule
into a medicine that can actually be given to a patient.
Describe the main dosage forms and routes relevant to anaesthesia.
For our practice the parenteral forms dominate: aqueous solutions for injection,
the most common; emulsions, such as the oil-in-water emulsion of propofol,
for insoluble drugs; suspensions and depot preparations for slow release;
and powders for reconstitution, such as thiopental,
where the drug is unstable in solution.
Beyond injection, there are inhalational preparations — the volatile agents and
medical gases; oral solid and liquid forms,
including modified-release preparations; transdermal patches, such as fentanyl,
for sustained delivery; topical preparations,
such as the eutectic local-anaesthetic cream;
and preparations for neuraxial and regional use, which must be preservative-free.
The route and the drug's properties together dictate which form is appropriate.
What are excipients, and what functions do they serve?
Excipients are the inactive ingredients included in a formulation to serve specific
purposes. Solvents and co-solvents dissolve the drug;
emulsifiers and surfactants suspend insoluble drugs,
as the egg phosphatide does for propofol.
Buffers and pH-adjusting agents keep the drug soluble and stable — the alkalinity
of thiopental, the acidity of local-anaesthetic solutions.
Antioxidants such as sodium metabisulphite prevent oxidative degradation.
Preservatives and antimicrobials retard microbial growth in multi-dose and emulsion
preparations. Stabilisers, isotonic agents, and, for some products,
added vasoconstrictors complete the list.
Excipients are not pharmacologically inert in the clinical sense:
they can cause reactions — sulphite sensitivity,
the lipid load of an emulsion — and their presence or absence,
as with preservatives in neuraxial preparations, has direct safety consequences.
Give examples of how formulation is used to control the rate or site of drug
release.
Formulation can be engineered to deliver a drug slowly or to a particular site.
Modified-release oral preparations release the drug gradually,
smoothing the concentration profile and allowing less frequent dosing — used for
opioids and many other drugs.
Depot injections, in oil or as a poorly soluble salt or suspension,
release drug slowly over days to weeks. Transdermal patches deliver a steady rate
across the skin, as with fentanyl.
Liposomal formulations encapsulate the drug to prolong its action,
as with liposomal bupivacaine for extended local analgesia.
Targeting to a site is achieved by the route — inhalational delivery to the lung,
neuraxial to the spinal cord, topical to the skin.
Each exploits formulation to match the time-course or location of effect to the
clinical need.
What is bioequivalence, and why does it matter for generic substitution?
Bioequivalence is the demonstration that two formulations of the same active
substance produce the same concentration profile — the same rate and extent of
absorption — so that they can be expected to have the same clinical effect and be
substituted for one another.
A generic product must demonstrate bioequivalence to the original to be approved.
It matters because, while the active substance is identical,
differences in formulation could in principle alter absorption;
bioequivalence testing provides the assurance that they do not differ to a
clinically important degree.
For most drugs this allows free substitution;
for the narrow-index and formulation-sensitive drugs mentioned earlier,
even small differences may matter, which is why brand consistency is sometimes
preferred.
What is a biosimilar, and how does it differ from a generic?
A biosimilar is a biological medicine — a large,
complex molecule such as a protein produced by living cells,
like a monoclonal antibody — that is highly similar to an already licensed
biological reference product.
It differs from a generic in that a small-molecule generic can be made identical to
the original, whereas a biological cannot be reproduced exactly because of its
size, complexity and dependence on the manufacturing process;
a biosimilar is therefore demonstrated to be highly similar in structure,
function and clinical effect, rather than identical.
Its approval requires a more extensive comparability exercise than a generic.
Biosimilars are increasingly important in medicine generally;
in anaesthesia the concept is encountered chiefly with some of the biological
agents our patients receive.
What determines the stability and shelf-life of a preparation,
and how is this managed?
Stability depends on the drug's susceptibility to hydrolysis, oxidation,
photodegradation and microbial contamination, and on temperature and pH.
It is managed by formulation — buffers,
antioxidants and preservatives — by packaging that excludes light and air,
by presenting unstable drugs as dry powders for reconstitution,
and by specifying storage conditions and an expiry date determined by stability
testing.
Some preparations are stable for years; others,
once reconstituted or drawn up — thiopental,
propofol — are stable only for hours and must be discarded,
both to ensure efficacy and to avoid degradation products and microbial growth.
Respecting these limits, and the storage requirements such as refrigeration or
protection from light, is a practical safety responsibility.
How are drugs classified legally, and why does this matter to the anaesthetist?
Medicines are subject to legal classification governing how they may be supplied
and prescribed, and a separate, stricter framework governs controlled drugs with a
potential for misuse — the opioids, ketamine,
the benzodiazepines and others — which are placed in schedules dictating
requirements for storage in a locked cabinet, record-keeping in a register,
witnessed administration and disposal, and prescription.
This matters greatly to the anaesthetist, who handles controlled drugs daily:
the legal requirements for their security,
accurate recording and accountable disposal are a routine professional and legal
obligation, and lapses have serious consequences.
The classification also reflects and reminds us of the abuse potential of agents we
use freely.
What measures in labelling and presentation reduce drug error?
Many errors arise from look-alike or sound-alike names and ampoules,
so a number of measures address presentation.
Standardised, colour-coded labels for syringes by drug class — following
international standards — help distinguish, for instance,
induction agents from relaxants at a glance.
Clear, legible labelling of ampoules and the labelling of every drawn-up syringe
are basic safeguards.
Distinct packaging and tall-man lettering reduce confusion between similar names.
Pre-filled syringes reduce preparation errors.
Careful checking, ideally double-checking of high-risk drugs,
and not stocking dangerous look-alikes side by side, all help.
These human-factors and presentation measures complement the pharmacology in
preventing the wrong drug, or wrong dose, from reaching the patient.
What standards and pharmacopoeias govern drug quality?
The quality, strength, purity and identity of medicines are governed by official
compendia, the pharmacopoeias — the British Pharmacopoeia,
the European Pharmacopoeia and the United States Pharmacopeia among them — which
set legally recognised standards and test methods that products must meet.
Regulatory authorities license medicines and inspect manufacture against good
manufacturing practice, ensuring that what is in the vial is what the label states,
in the stated amount and purity. This framework is the reason a clinician can trust
a standard preparation.
It underlies the assurance behind both originator and generic products,
and it is the background guarantee on which safe prescribing rests.
Pull it together: why is an understanding of nomenclature and formulation part of
safe practice?
Because the name and the formulation determine that the right active substance,
in a usable and predictable form, reaches the patient safely.
Understanding nomenclature — the chemical, generic and brand names,
the international conventions and the persisting dual names — lets me prescribe
unambiguously, read the worldwide literature,
and avoid the errors of confused or similar names.
Understanding formulation — the dosage forms, the routes, the excipients,
the control of release, and the limits of stability and storage — lets me choose
the right preparation for the route and the patient,
anticipate the consequences of excipients and of reconstitution,
and respect the security and handling of controlled drugs.
Together with the human-factors safeguards of labelling and checking,
this knowledge ensures that the pharmacology I have learnt is actually delivered as
intended.
Say more about the chemical name and how systematic naming works.
The chemical name describes the molecular structure according to a systematic
convention, that of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry,
specifying the parent structure, the substituent groups and their positions,
and the stereochemistry.
It is unambiguous and complete, so that a chemist can draw the molecule from the
name, but it is long and unwieldy for clinical use — the systematic name of a
common drug may run to a line of text. For everyday purposes it is therefore
replaced by the short generic name.
The chemical name's value to us is conceptual:
it underlies the structural classification of drugs and reminds us that the generic
name stands for a precisely defined molecule.
Are there useful conventions in generic names that help recognise a drug's class?
Yes — the international naming system uses common stems, usually suffixes,
to signal a drug's class, which is a real aid to recognition.
The ending '-caine' denotes a local anaesthetic,
'-curium' or '-curonium' a neuromuscular blocker,
'-azepam' or '-azolam' a benzodiazepine, '-olol' a beta-blocker,
'-pril' an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor,
'-sartan' an angiotensin-receptor blocker,
'-coxib' a selective cyclo-oxygenase-two inhibitor,
'-tidine' a histamine-two antagonist, and '-statin' a lipid-lowering agent.
Recognising the stem allows me to infer the likely class,
mechanism and effects of an unfamiliar drug,
and it is a deliberate feature of the naming system intended to promote safety and
understanding.
How are combination products and prodrugs named?
Combination products containing more than one active substance are given a name
that may combine elements of the components or a separate approved name,
and good practice is to prescribe such combinations explicitly so that each active
substance and its dose is clear, since hidden constituents are a source of error —
for instance co-amoxiclav, or compound analgesics containing paracetamol with an
opioid.
Prodrugs are named as their own entities even though they are inactive until
metabolised — codeine, parecoxib, fospropofol — and the prescriber must know that
the named drug is a precursor of the active agent.
Clarity about exactly what active substances a named product contains is the safety
principle in both cases.
Contrast the enteral and parenteral routes and their formulation implications.
Enteral administration — oral, sublingual,
rectal — uses the gastrointestinal tract; parenteral administration bypasses it,
by injection or other non-gut routes.
The enteral route is convenient and needs formulations that survive the gut and
dissolve appropriately, but it is subject to variable absorption and first-pass
metabolism.
The parenteral route gives reliable, rapid and complete delivery,
essential in anaesthesia, but demands sterile,
appropriately buffered and isotonic formulations and carries the hazards of
injection.
The choice of route therefore dictates the formulation:
a sterile aqueous solution for intravenous use,
a gastro-resistant or modified-release coating for oral use,
a stable presentation for each.
The two routes are complementary, chosen to match urgency,
reliability and the drug's properties.
Describe the parenteral routes in more detail.
The intravenous route delivers the drug directly into the circulation,
giving immediate, complete and titratable effect,
and is our principal route for induction and infusion;
it demands sterility and compatible, non-irritant formulations.
The intramuscular route gives slower,
fairly reliable absorption and suits depot preparations and situations without
venous access. The subcutaneous route gives slow absorption, used for insulin,
heparins and palliative infusions.
The intradermal route is used for testing and for local infiltration.
Each route influences the speed and completeness of absorption and the formulation
required — a depot in oil for prolonged intramuscular release,
an isotonic solution for subcutaneous comfort.
Matching route to clinical need is a basic formulation decision.
What special formulation requirements apply to neuraxial and regional preparations?
Drugs given into the subarachnoid or epidural space, or around nerves,
must be free of preservatives and additives that could be neurotoxic,
because the usual antimicrobial and antioxidant excipients can damage neural tissue
when placed in close contact with it;
preservative-free preparations are therefore mandatory for neuraxial use.
The pH and additives are controlled,
and for spinal anaesthesia the baricity is deliberately set — a hyperbaric solution
made dense with glucose to control spread under gravity.
Vasoconstrictors may be added to prolong a block.
The overriding principle is that what is safe intravenously is not necessarily safe
intrathecally, so neuraxial formulations are specifically prepared and checked,
and the wrong-route error guarded against.
Outline the inhalational and respiratory formulations.
For systemic anaesthesia the volatile agents are liquids vaporised in
agent-specific, calibrated vaporisers,
and the medical gases are supplied compressed or liquefied.
For drug delivery to the airways themselves,
the metered-dose inhaler delivers a fixed dose of drug suspended or dissolved in a
propellant; the dry-powder inhaler delivers micronised drug as a powder,
dispersed by the patient's inspiration;
and the nebuliser converts a solution into a fine mist for inhalation,
useful in the breathless or ventilated patient.
Particle size is critical, determining how far into the respiratory tract the drug
deposits. These formulations exploit the lung either as a route to the systemic
circulation or for local action on the airways.
Describe transdermal and depot formulations.
The transdermal patch delivers a drug at a steady rate across the skin into the
systemic circulation, bypassing first-pass metabolism and giving prolonged,
constant delivery — the fentanyl patch for chronic pain is the familiar anaesthetic
example, with the caveats of a slow onset, a reservoir that persists after removal,
and altered absorption with heat.
Depot formulations release a drug slowly from an injected reservoir over days to
weeks — a drug in oil, a poorly soluble salt,
or a microsphere preparation — used for some hormones and antipsychotics.
Both exploit formulation to convert a short-acting drug into a sustained delivery
system, matching the duration of effect to a clinical need for prolonged,
steady concentrations.
What are liposomal and other advanced delivery formulations?
Liposomal formulations encapsulate the drug within lipid vesicles that release it
slowly, prolonging its action and sometimes altering its distribution and toxicity.
The relevant anaesthetic example is liposomal bupivacaine,
designed to extend the duration of a local-anaesthetic block towards a day or more
from a single administration, and liposomal preparations of some other drugs exist.
Related approaches include nanoparticle and microsphere carriers and targeted
delivery systems.
These advanced formulations aim to control where and for how long a drug acts,
offering prolonged analgesia or targeted effect;
their cost and the evidence for their advantage over conventional techniques are
matters of ongoing evaluation, but they illustrate the direction of formulation
science.
How is modified release achieved in oral preparations?
Several formulation strategies control the release of an oral drug.
A matrix system embeds the drug in a slowly eroding or diffusing material so that
it is released gradually. A reservoir or coated system surrounds the drug with a
membrane that controls its diffusion.
An osmotic pump uses water drawn across a membrane to push drug out through a small
orifice at a constant rate. Enteric coatings resist gastric acid and dissolve only
in the more alkaline small intestine, protecting an acid-labile drug or the stomach.
These mechanisms smooth the concentration profile,
reduce dosing frequency and improve tolerability,
and they are the reason modified-release products must not be crushed and are
sometimes prescribed by brand to ensure a consistent release characteristic.
Take us through the main classes of excipient and the hazards each can carry.
Solvents and co-solvents dissolve the drug but may themselves cause harm — the
propylene glycol in some preparations can accumulate.
Emulsifiers and lipids, as in the propofol emulsion,
support microbial growth and impose a lipid load.
Buffers and pH-adjusters keep the drug stable but create non-physiological pH that
causes pain or incompatibility. Antioxidants such as metabisulphite prevent
degradation but can provoke sulphite sensitivity.
Antimicrobial preservatives prevent contamination but are neurotoxic if given
neuraxially and can cause reactions. Isotonic agents,
stabilisers and colourings complete the list,
the last occasionally causing hypersensitivity.
The clinical message is that excipients are not inert: they have their own hazards,
and knowing what a preparation contains explains both its behaviour and some of its
adverse effects.
Why does the formulation of propofol differ between products, and does it matter?
Propofol must be an oil-in-water emulsion because the drug is insoluble in water,
and the emulsion supports microbial growth,
so manufacturers add an antimicrobial retardant — different products use disodium
edetate, metabisulphite or benzyl alcohol, and the lipid composition may differ,
some using a mix of long- and medium-chain triglycerides.
These differences matter in several ways:
the metabisulphite-containing preparation may concern the sulphite-sensitive
patient; the medium-chain preparation may cause less injection pain;
and despite the retardants, strict asepsis and prompt use remain essential because
contaminated propofol has caused outbreaks of infection.
So although the active drug is identical,
the formulation differences have real implications for allergy,
comfort and infection control.
Explain the legal scheduling of controlled drugs.
Controlled drugs are classified into schedules according to their therapeutic
usefulness and potential for harm and misuse,
and the schedule determines the legal controls.
The most restricted schedule covers drugs with little or no medical use;
the next covers the strong opioids, the major stimulants and others we use,
requiring storage in a locked controlled-drugs cabinet,
recording of every transaction in a register, safe-custody,
and special prescription requirements;
subsequent schedules cover drugs such as certain benzodiazepines and ketamine with
somewhat lighter but still significant controls;
and the least restricted covers preparations exempt from most requirements.
For the anaesthetist, who handles these drugs constantly, knowing the storage,
recording, witnessing and disposal obligations for each is a daily legal and
professional duty.
What is the standard for colour-coding of anaesthetic syringe labels?
International standards specify a system of colour-coded,
class-based labels for the syringes we prepare,
so that a drug class can be recognised at a glance and the risk of giving the wrong
class reduced.
Under the standard, induction agents and other hypnotics are labelled yellow,
the muscle relaxants a bold red, their reversal agents a contrasting shade,
the opioids blue, the local anaesthetics grey, the vasopressors violet,
and the anticholinergic and other classes their own colours,
with the drug name printed on the coloured background.
Using these standardised labels, labelling every syringe,
and not relying on memory or position,
are simple but powerful human-factors measures against the syringe-swap error,
which has caused serious harm.
How do look-alike and sound-alike errors arise, and how are they reduced?
Errors arise when two drugs have similar names or similar packaging,
so that one is selected or read in mistake for the other — confusions between
similarly spelt drug names, or between ampoules of similar appearance but very
different content and potency.
They are reduced by several measures: tall-man lettering,
which capitalises the distinguishing part of similar names to make them stand out;
distinct packaging and labelling; storing dangerous look-alikes apart rather than
adjacent; using pre-filled syringes; barcode checking; and careful,
ideally independent, double-checking of high-risk drugs.
These are human-factors solutions to a human-factors problem,
complementing the pharmacological knowledge with system design that makes the right
choice easy and the wrong choice hard.
What regulatory framework assures that a marketed medicine is what it claims to be?
Medicines are licensed by a national or regional regulatory authority — such as the
bodies in the United Kingdom, Europe,
the United States and India — which assesses quality,
safety and efficacy before granting a marketing authorisation,
and which continues post-marketing surveillance.
Manufacture must comply with good manufacturing practice,
with inspection of facilities, and products must meet the standards of the official
pharmacopoeias for identity, strength, purity and quality.
This framework is why a clinician can trust that a vial contains the stated drug at
the stated strength and purity, for both originator and generic products.
It is the regulatory guarantee underpinning safe prescribing,
and a reason to be wary of medicines obtained outside it.
Why are substandard and falsified medicines a concern globally?
Because in parts of the world the supply chain is not fully secured,
substandard medicines — which fail to meet quality standards through poor
manufacture or degradation — and falsified medicines — which deliberately
misrepresent their identity or source — reach patients, with serious consequences:
treatment failure, toxicity, and the promotion of antimicrobial resistance.
The risk is greatest for medicines bought outside the regulated system.
The safeguards are procurement through the regulated supply chain,
attention to packaging and authentication features,
awareness of unexpected lack of effect or unusual reactions,
and reporting of suspected quality defects to the regulator.
It is a reminder that the assurance of quality,
taken for granted in a well-regulated system, cannot be assumed everywhere,
which matters for a globally applicable practice.
Return to biosimilars: what governs their use and safety monitoring?
Because a biological cannot be copied exactly,
a biosimilar is licensed on the basis of a comparability exercise demonstrating
that it is highly similar to the reference product in structure, function, quality,
and clinical efficacy and safety, rather than on bioequivalence alone.
Once licensed, biosimilars are subject to particular pharmacovigilance,
including the need to record the specific product and batch given,
because the immunogenicity and rare effects of biologicals can differ subtly
between products and must be traceable.
Decisions about switching between a reference biological and its biosimilar are
made with this in mind. For the anaesthetist the relevance is chiefly in the
biological therapies our patients receive,
where knowing the exact product matters for any reaction.
How is a new generic name assigned, and what are orphan drugs?
When a new substance is developed, an international non-proprietary name is
assigned through a formal process coordinated by the World Health Organization,
which selects a unique name, incorporating the appropriate class stem where one
applies, and ensures it does not conflict or confuse with existing names across
languages.
This gives every active substance a single global identifier before it reaches the
market.
Orphan drugs are those developed for rare diseases,
which receive special regulatory and commercial incentives because the small market
would otherwise discourage development; they are named by the same conventions.
The orderly assignment of names is itself a safety measure,
preventing the confusion that unregulated naming would create.
What technological measures support safe drug selection and administration?
Beyond labelling and tall-man lettering, several systems reduce error.
Barcode verification at administration checks that the drug,
dose and patient match the order. Automated dispensing cabinets control access and
reduce selection errors.
Electronic prescribing with decision support flags interactions,
allergies and dose errors at the point of prescribing.
Smart infusion pumps with drug libraries and dose limits guard against programming
errors.
Pre-filled and ready-to-administer preparations remove error-prone preparation
steps. These technologies address the human-factors origins of medication error by
building checks into the process, and they complement rather than replace the
clinician's knowledge and vigilance.
Their value is greatest for the high-risk drugs we handle routinely.
Discuss the storage and cold chain requirements of temperature-sensitive medicines.
Many medicines, particularly biologicals, vaccines and some hormones and emulsions,
are temperature-sensitive and must be kept within a defined range — commonly
refrigerated, neither frozen nor warmed — throughout storage and transport,
the so-called cold chain.
A temperature excursion can degrade the product and render it ineffective or
unsafe, sometimes without visible change,
so refrigerators are monitored and excursions investigated before the affected
stock is used.
Other drugs require protection from light or storage below a stated temperature.
Respecting these requirements, checking that the cold chain has been maintained,
and not using product of uncertain provenance are practical responsibilities,
especially as more biological therapies enter use.
Why are single-use ampoules and unit-dose presentations preferred for many
injectables?
Single-use ampoules and vials, containing one dose without preservative,
avoid the contamination and dosing errors associated with repeatedly entering a
multi-dose container, and they remove the need for preservatives that can
themselves cause harm — important for preservative-free neuraxial preparations.
Unit-dose and ready-to-administer presentations,
prepared under controlled conditions,
reduce the error-prone steps of drawing up and diluting at the bedside,
and reduce the risk of microbial contamination of the prepared syringe.
The trade-offs are cost and waste.
The trend in safe practice is towards presentations that minimise manipulation —
pre-filled syringes and ready-to-use solutions — because each manipulation is an
opportunity for error or contamination.
What standards govern reconstitution and dilution of drugs?
Drugs presented as powders or concentrates must be reconstituted or diluted
correctly, using the specified diluent, volume and technique,
because errors here produce wrong concentrations and wrong doses — a recognised and
dangerous source of error, especially with high-risk drugs and in paediatrics.
Good practice specifies the diluent and final concentration,
favours standardised concentrations across an institution, uses aseptic technique,
and labels the prepared solution immediately with drug, concentration,
diluent and time.
Where possible, preparation is moved away from the bedside to a pharmacy or to
ready-to-administer products. Clear protocols,
standard concentrations and immediate labelling are the safeguards against
reconstitution and dilution error.
Briefly, what is the economic significance of generics and biosimilars?
Generics and biosimilars are central to the affordability and sustainability of
healthcare.
Once a drug's patent expires, competing generic versions,
having only to demonstrate bioequivalence rather than repeat full development,
are far cheaper, and their availability greatly reduces cost while maintaining the
same active substance — which is why generic prescribing is encouraged.
Biosimilars do the same for the expensive biological medicines,
introducing competition and reducing the cost of therapies that would otherwise
consume a large share of resources.
This economic role is particularly important for health systems with limited
budgets, and it is part of why the regulatory framework that assures the quality of
generics and biosimilars matters so much.
Pull together the chain of safe drug handling from prescription to record.
Safe handling is a chain in which every link matters.
The prescription must be unambiguous — correct drug by an appropriate name, dose,
route, frequency and patient — checked against allergies and interactions,
ideally with electronic support.
Selection must pick the right product,
guarded against look-alike and sound-alike error.
Preparation must use the right diluent and concentration with aseptic technique,
with immediate, standardised labelling — the colour-coded class labels for our
syringes.
Administration must confirm the right drug, dose, route, time and patient,
ideally with barcode verification, and for controlled drugs with witnessing.
And the administration must be recorded accurately,
with controlled-drug registers reconciled.
Understanding nomenclature and formulation underpins this chain,
ensuring the right active substance, in the right form,
reaches the right patient safely.
Why must the route of administration always be confirmed,
and what is the never-event you have in mind?
Because some drugs are safe by one route and lethal by another,
so administering a drug by the wrong route can be catastrophic and irreversible.
The classic never-event is the inadvertent intrathecal administration of a drug
intended for intravenous use, the most infamous being the accidental spinal
injection of the chemotherapy agent vincristine, which is almost always fatal;
this led to engineered safeguards, including connectors that physically prevent an
intravenous syringe from being attached to a neuraxial device.
The general lesson is that the route is as essential a part of a safe
administration as the drug and dose: it must be checked explicitly,
neuraxial and intravenous systems kept physically distinct,
preservative-free preparations used for neuraxial routes,
and every syringe clearly labelled with its intended route.
Confirming the route is not a formality but a barrier against a fatal error.
What is the value of standardised infusion concentrations?
Standardising the concentration of an infused drug across an institution removes a
major source of error.
When the same drug is always prepared at the same concentration,
the calculations linking infusion rate to dose become consistent and familiar,
the smart-pump drug libraries can enforce safe limits,
and the risk of a tenfold or other catastrophic concentration error is reduced.
It is especially valuable for high-risk infusions — vasoactive drugs, sedatives,
opioids — and in settings such as paediatrics and intensive care where weight-based
dosing multiplies the chance of error.
Ready-to-use premixed bags and standard concentrations,
combined with pump libraries and clear labelling, convert a calculation-heavy,
error-prone task into a standardised, checkable one,
which is why their adoption is part of modern medication safety.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, A drug has chemical, generic (non-proprietary,
internationally coordinated) and proprietary (brand) names;
generic prescribing is the default,
with brand specified for narrow-index or formulation-sensitive drugs.
Second, Dual nomenclature must be known both ways — adrenaline/epinephrine,
lidocaine/lignocaine, paracetamol/acetaminophen,
suxamethonium/succinylcholine — for international, country-neutral practice.
Third, Formulation converts an active substance into a usable medicine using
excipients (solvents, emulsifiers, buffers, antioxidants, preservatives),
which are not clinically inert — preservative-free preparations are essential for
neuraxial use.
Fourth, Formulation controls rate and site of release (modified-release, depot,
transdermal, liposomal); generics require bioequivalence,
while biosimilars are highly similar rather than identical biological products.
Fifth, Controlled-drug legal schedules govern security, recording and disposal;
labelling standards, colour-coding and checking reduce look-alike/sound-alike
error, and pharmacopoeias guarantee quality.
Thank you. That concludes the station.